Add documentation for ml inference search request processor/ search response processor (#7852)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _search-plugins/search-pipelines/ml-inference-search-response.md

---
layout: default
title: ML inference (response) 
nav_order: 40
has_children: false
parent: Search processors
grand_parent: Search pipelines
---

# ML inference search response processor
Introduced 2.16
{: .label .label-purple }

> The `ml_inference` search response processor is used to invoke registered machine learning (ML) models registered in order to incorporate their outputs as new fields in the documents within the search results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `ml_inference` search response processor is used to invoke registered machine learning (ML) models in order to incorporate their outputs as new fields in documents within search results.
```

| Parameter | Data type | Required/Optional | Description  |
|:--| :--- | :--- |:---|
| `model_id` | String | Required | The ID of the ML model used by the processor. |
| `function_name`        | String    | Optional for externally hosted models<br/><br/>Required for local models | The function name of the ML model configured in the processor. For local models, valid values are `sparse_encoding`, `sparse_tokenize`, `text_embedding`, and `text_similarity`. For externally hosted models, valid value is `remote`. Default is `remote`. |
| `model_config`         | Object    | Optional   | Custom configuration options for the ML model. For more information, see [The `model_config` object]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/api/model-apis/register-model/#the-model_config-object).|
| `model_input`          | String    | Optional for externally hosted models<br/><br/>Required for local models | A template that defines the input field format expected by the model. Each local model type might use a different set of inputs. For externally hosted models, default is `"{ \"parameters\": ${ml_inference.parameters} }`. |

> | `input_map`            | Array | Optional for externally hosted models<br/><br/>Required for local models | An array specifying how to map document fields in search response to the model input fields. Each element of the array is a map in the `"<model_input_field>": "<document_field>"` format and corresponds to one model invocation for a document field. If no input mapping is specified for an externally hosted model, then all fields from the document are passed to the model directly as input. The `input_map` size indicates the number of times the model is invoked (the number of Predict API requests). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `input_map`            | Array | Optional for externally hosted models<br/><br/>Required for local models | An array specifying how to map document fields in the search response to the model input fields. Each element of the array is a map in the `"<model_input_field>": "<document_field>"` format and corresponds to one model invocation of a document field. If no input mapping is specified for an externally hosted model, then all document fields are passed to the model directly as input. The `input_map` size indicates the number of times the model is invoked (the number of Predict API requests). |
```

| `<model_input_field>`  | String    | Optional for externally hosted models<br/><br/>Required for local models  | The model input field name. |

> | `<document_field>`     | String    | Optional for externally hosted models<br/><br/>Required for local models | The name or JSON path of the document field in search response used as the model input.  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `<document_field>`     | String    | Optional for externally hosted models<br/><br/>Required for local models | The name or JSON path of the document field in the search response used as the model input.  |
```

| `<new_document_field>` | String    | Optional for externally hosted models<br/><br/>Required for local models | The name of the new field in the document in which the model's output (specified by `model_output`) is stored. If no output mapping is specified for externally hosted models, then all fields from the model output are added to the new document field.  |
| `<model_output_field>` | String    | Optional for externally hosted models<br/><br/>Required for local models | The name or JSON path of the field in the model output to be stored in the `new_document_field`.  |
| `full_response_path`   | Boolean   | Optional   | Set this parameter to `true` if the `model_output_field` contains a full JSON path to the field instead of the field name. The model output will then be fully parsed to get the value of the field. Default is `true` for local models and `false` for externally hosted models.  |
| `ignore_missing`       | Boolean   | Optional  | If `true` and any of the input fields defined in the `input_map` or `output_map` are missing, then the missing fields are ignored. Otherwise, a missing field causes a failure. Default is `false`. |

> | `ignore_failure`       | Boolean   | Optional  | Specifies whether the processor continues execution even if it encounters an error. If `true`, then any failure is ignored and search continues. If `false`, then any failure causes search to be canceled. Default is `false`. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `ignore_failure`       | Boolean   | Optional  | Specifies whether the processor continues execution even if it encounters an error. If `true`, then any failure is ignored and the search continues. If `false`, then any failure causes the search to be canceled. Default is `false`. |
```

> | `override`             | Boolean   | Optional   | Relevant if a document in the response already contains a field with the name specified in `<new_document_field>`. If `override` is `false`, then the input field is skipped. If `true`, then the existing field value is overridden by the new model output. Default is `false`.  |

Reviewer: Just want to confirm that "overridden" shouldn't be "overwritten".

Reviewer 2: A parameter is "overridden". Text is "overwritten" so technically the value is "overwritten" but I think it's OK to keep it as is (meaning the field is overridden).

The `input_map` and `output_map` mappings support standard [JSON path](https://github.com/json-path/JsonPath) notation for specifying complex data structures.
{: .note}

### Setup

Create an index named `my_index` and index one document to explain the mappings:

```json
POST /my_index/_doc/1
{
  "passage_text": "hello world"
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

## Using the processor

Follow these steps to use the processor in a pipeline. You must provide a model ID when creating the processor. Before testing a pipeline using the processor, make sure that the model is successfully deployed. You can check the model state using the [Get Model API]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/api/model-apis/get-model/).

For local models, you must provide a `model_input` field that specifies the model input format. Add any input fields in `model_config` to `model_input`.

For remote models, the `model_input` field is optional, and its default value is `"{ \"parameters\": ${ml_inference.parameters} }`.

### Example: Externally hosted model

> The following example configures an `ml_inference` search response processor with an externally hosted model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example shows you how to configure an `ml_inference` search response processor with an externally hosted model.
```

**Step 1: Create a pipeline**

> The following example creates a search pipeline for an externally hosted text embedding model. The model requires an `input` field and generates results in a `data` field. It converts the text in the `passage_text` field into text embeddings and stores the embeddings in the `passage_embedding` field. The `function_name` is not explicitly specified in the processor configuration, so it defaults to `remote`, signifying an externally hosted model:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example shows you how to create a search pipeline for an externally hosted text embedding model. The model requires an `input` field and generates results in a `data` field. It converts the text in the `passage_text` field into text embeddings and stores the embeddings in the `passage_embedding` field. The `function_name` is not explicitly specified in the processor configuration, so it defaults to `remote`, signifying an externally hosted model:
```

```json
PUT /_search/pipeline/ml_inference_pipeline
{
  "description": "Generate passage_embedding when search documents",
  "processors": [
    {
      "ml_inference": {
        "model_id": "<your model id>",
        "input_map": [
          {
            "input": "passage_text"
          }
        ],
        "output_map": [
          {
            "passage_embedding": "data"
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  ]
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

When making a Predict API request to an externally hosted model, all necessary fields and parameters are usually contained within a `parameters` object:

```json
POST /_plugins/_ml/models/cleMb4kBJ1eYAeTMFFg4/_predict
{
  "parameters": {
    "input": [
      {
        ...
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

When specifying the `input_map` for an externally hosted model, you can directly reference the `input` field instead of providing its dot path `parameters.input`:

```json
"input_map": [
  {
    "input": "passage_text"
  }
]
```

**Step 2: Run the pipeline**

> Run the following query providing the pipeline name in the request:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the following query, providing the pipeline name in the request:
```

```json
GET /my_index/_search?search_pipeline=ml_inference_pipeline_local
{
  "query": {
    "match_all": {
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

The response confirms that the processor has generated text embeddings in the `passage_embedding` field. The document within `_source` now contains both the `passage_text` and `passage_embedding` fields:

```json

{
  "took": 288,
  "timed_out": false,
  "_shards": {
    "total": 1,
    "successful": 1,
    "skipped": 0,
    "failed": 0
  },
  "hits": {
    "total": {
      "value": 1,
      "relation": "eq"
    },
    "max_score": 0.00009405752,
    "hits": [
      {
        "_index": "my_index",
        "_id": "1",
        "_score": 0.00009405752,
        "_source": {
          "passage_text": "hello world",
          "passage_embedding": [
            0.017304314,
            -0.021530833,
            0.050184276,
            0.08962978,
            ...]
        }
      }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

### Example: Local model

> The following example configures an `ml_inference` search response processor with a local model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example shows you how to configure an `ml_inference` search response processor with a local model.
```

**Step 1: Create a pipeline**

> 

Reviewer: Line below: "pretrained sentence transformer model"

> The following example creates an search pipeline for the `huggingface/sentence-transformers/all-distilroberta-v1` local model. The model is a sentence transformer [pretrained model]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/pretrained-models/#sentence-transformers) hosted in your OpenSearch cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example shows you how to create a search pipeline for the `huggingface/sentence-transformers/all-distilroberta-v1` local model. The model is a sentence transformer [pretrained model]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/pretrained-models/#sentence-transformers) hosted in your OpenSearch cluster.
```

> If you invoke the model using the Predict API, then the request looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you invoke the model using the Predict API, then the request appears as follows:
```

```json
POST /_plugins/_ml/_predict/text_embedding/cleMb4kBJ1eYAeTMFFg4
{
  "text_docs":[ "today is sunny"],
  "return_number": true,
  "target_response": ["sentence_embedding"]
}
```

Using this schema, specify the `model_input` as follows:

```json
 "model_input": "{ \"text_docs\": ${input_map.text_docs}, \"return_number\": ${model_config.return_number}, \"target_response\": ${model_config.target_response} }"
```

In the `input_map`, map the `passage_text` document field to the `text_docs` field expected by the model:

```json
"input_map": [
  {
    "text_docs": "passage_text"
  }
]
```

> Because you specified the field to convert into embeddings as a JSON path, you need to set the `full_response_path` to `true` so that the full JSON document is parsed to obtain the input field:

Reviewer: "Because you specified that the field should convert"? "in order to obtain"

> Because you specified the field to convert into embeddings as a JSON path, you need to set the `full_response_path` to `true` so that the full JSON document is parsed to obtain the input field:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because you specified the field to be converted into embeddings as a JSON path, you need to set the `full_response_path` to `true`. Then the full JSON document is parsed in order to obtain the input field:
```

```json
"full_response_path": true
```

The text in the `passage_text` field will be used to generate embeddings:

```json
{
  "passage_text": "hello world"
}
```

The Predict API request returns the following response:

```json
{
  "inference_results" : [
    {
      "output" : [
        {
          "name" : "sentence_embedding",
          "data_type" : "FLOAT32",
          "shape" : [
            768
          ],
          "data" : [
            0.25517133,
            -0.28009856,
            0.48519906,
            ...
          ]
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

The model generates embeddings in the `$.inference_results.*.output.*.data` field. The `output_map` maps this field to the newly created `passage_embedding` field in the search response document:

```json
"output_map": [
  {
    "passage_embedding": "$.inference_results.*.output.*.data"
  }
]
```

To configure an `ml_inference` search response processor with a local model, specify the `function_name` explicitly. In this example, the `function_name` is `text_embedding`. For information about valid `function_name` values, see [Request fields](#request-fields).

> The final configuration of the `ml_inference` search response processor with the local model is the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following is the final configuration of the `ml_inference` search response processor with the local model:
```

```json
PUT /_search/pipeline/ml_inference_pipeline_local
{
  "description": "search passage and generates embeddings",
  "processors": [
    {
      "ml_inference": {
        "function_name": "text_embedding",
        "full_response_path": true,
        "model_id": "<your model id>",
        "model_config": {
          "return_number": true,
          "target_response": ["sentence_embedding"]
        },
        "model_input": "{ \"text_docs\": ${input_map.text_docs}, \"return_number\": ${model_config.return_number}, \"target_response\": ${model_config.target_response} }",
        "input_map": [
          {
            "text_docs": "passage_text"
          }
        ],
        "output_map": [
          {
            "passage_embedding": "$.inference_results.*.output.*.data"
          }
        ],
        "ignore_missing": true,
        "ignore_failure": true
      }
    }
  ]
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

**Step 2: Run the pipeline**

> Run the following query providing the pipeline name in the request:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the following query, providing the pipeline name in the request:
```
